---
layout:     post
title:      GAMESS-US
subtitle:   安装与使用
date:       2018-04-29
author:     zito
header-img: img/github-logo.png
catalog: true
tags:
    - ab_initio code {quantum chemistry}

---

#GMESS-US
> 2017.11.4 Gamess Linux版安装成功。
GUI for Gamess: wxMacMolPlt, open-source
For UNIX/LINUX systems requires script: rungms
Input files are modular, arranged in \$groups

**Most common input groups**
>* **\$SYSTEM**: specifies memory, time limit
TIMLIM=(default=600 min)
MWORDS=(default=1)
MEMDDI= Only relevant for parallel run
Total required memory (divide by number of processors to get memory 
requested/node)
>* **\$CONTRL**: specifies basics of calculation
**ICHARG=** (specifies charge on system)
**MULT=** (specifies spin multiplcity)
1 for singlet, 2 for doublet, …
**EXETYP=**
Check: checks input for errors
Run: actual run
**UNITS=**
angs (default); bohr
**Runtyp=** (type of run)
Energy (single point energy run)
Gradient (energy 1st derivative wrt coordinates)
Optimize (optimize geometry)
Hessian (energy second derivative, vibrational
frequencies, thermodynamic properties):
generates \$HESS group in .dat file)
Sadpoint (saddle point search:requires hessian in \$HESS group)
IRC (performs IRC calculation: usually requires \$IRC group, \$HESS group)
**scftyp=** (type of wavefunction)
RHF; ROHF; UHF; MCSCF; GVB
**mplevl=**
0 (no perturbation theory)
2 (MP2: valid for RHF, ROHF, MCSCF, GVB)
>* **\$BASIS**: specifies basis set if standard
**GBASIS=** STO; N21; N31; TZV…
NGAUSS=(# gaussians for STO, N21, N31)
NDFUNC=(# sets of d’s on heavy atoms
NPFUNC=(# sets of p’s on hydrogens)
NFFUNC=(# sets of f’s on TM’s)
DIFFSP=(# sets of diffuse sp on heavies)
DIFFS=(# diffuse s functions hydrogens)
>* **\$DATA**: specifies nuclear coordinates, basis set if non-standard
Title line (will be printed in output)
Symmetry group
C1, CS, CNV (such as, C2V), …
Blank line except C1
Symbol Z xcoord ycoord zcoord
Symbol = atomic symbol
Z = atomic number
xcoord,ycoord, zcoord = Cartesian coords
Internal coords is another option
Repeat this line for each symmetry unique atom (see below)
Need to specify basis set after each
coordinate line if \$BASIS is not present
symmetry unique atoms
H2O: O and 1 H
NH3: N and 1 H
saves CPU time (e.g., numerical hessians only displace symmetry unique atoms)
Need to follow conventions in GAMESS manual
Cs, Cnh: plane is XY
Cnv: axis is Z
**Other important groups**
>* \$GUESS, \$HESS, \$VEC, \$IRC, \$VIB

**Input syntax**
>* \$ sign must be in column 2
>* All groups must terminate with \$END (this $ can be anywhere except column 1)

**GAMESS input basics summaried by Jan Jensen**
http://molecularmodelingbasics.blogspot.com/2009/07/some-gamess-input-basics_24.html

Here is an input file for a single point energy calculation at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory for the H2 molecule:
```
$contrl runtyp=energy dfttyp=b3lyp $end
$basis gbasis=n31 ngauss=6 ndfunc=1 $end
$data
Title line: you can write anything here
c1
H 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
H 1.0 0.753 0.0 0.0
$end
```

The order of the groups doesn’t matter, so you can put the \$basis group below the \$data group. You can have several groups of the same kind (e.g. two \$contrl groups). If you have the same keyword in both groups, it is the value in the last group that counts. For example,
```
$contrl runtyp=energy dfttyp=b3lyp $end
$contrl runtyp=optimize $end
```
is perfectly legal, and will result in an geometry optimization.
The order of the keywords within a group doesn’t matter:
```
$contrl runtyp=energy dfttyp=b3lyp $end
```
is the same as
```
$contrl dfttyp=b3lyp runtyp=energy $end
```
Note that there is a space in front of any line starting with a $ sign. This is important and if you leave it out GAMESS will not read that line. Note you can use this to “uncomment” a line by adding, for example, a ! for example, this
```
$contrl runtyp=energy dfttyp=b3lyp $end
!$contrl runtyp=optimize $end
```
will result in a single point energy calculation. You can use capital letters if you want. For parameters that can be true for false, you can use either “.true.” or “.t.” and “.false.” or “.f.” (there's an example below). 
A line can only be 80 characters long. Anything after that is ignored. It is perfectly legal to split a line, for example:
```
$contrl runtyp=energy
dfttyp=b3lyp $end
```
**Some useful options***
Almost all of the parameters have default (but there is no default basis set and no defaults in $data). For example, the default runtyp is energy, so
```
$contrl dfttyp=b3lyp $end
```
will result in a single point energy evaluation. If \$contrl is missing entirely, GAMESS will compute a single point energy at the RHF level.There is a few defaults that I almost always change.

**Single point energy calculations (not AM1 or PM3)**
```
$scf dirscf=.t. $end
```
This tells GAMESS to recompute the integrals at each SCF step rather than reading them from hard disk. Most computers can recompute a number faster than they can find it on the hard disk.

**DFT single point energy calculations**
```
$dft sg1=.t. $end
```
Computing the DFT energy requires a numerical integration over a grid. The default grid is very fine (has a lot of points). Standard Grid 1 (sg1) is adequate for most purposes and much faster. Note that this leads to inaccurate gradients and should not be used for geometry optimizations.

***DFT, AM1, and PM3 frequency calculations***
```
$force nvib=2 $end
```
DFT and semiempirical Hessians (second energy derivatives) are computed numerically, by displacing each atom in the x, y, and z direction and computing the first derivative. This is usually not accurate enough. nvib=2 leads to a displacement in both the positive and negative x, y, and z direction resulting in more accurate frequencies.

***Geometry optimizations***
```
$statpt opttol=0.0005 nstep=50 $end
$contrl nzvar=1 $end
$zmat dlc=.t. auto=.t. $end
```
I think the default criterion for geometry convergence (0.0001) is too strict, and the default number of steps (2o) is too small. So I usually use 0.0005 and 50, respectively. Optimizing in internal coordinates instead of Cartesian coordinates (default) usually speeds up convergence, because the former are "more quadratic". nzvar=1 tells GAMESS to use internal coordinates and dlc and auto tells GAMESS to automatically generate delocalized internal coordinates.

Unfortunately, the DLC implementation in GAMESS only looks for covalent bonds, not H-bonds and such. So you have to specify these if you have specify non-covalently bonded molecules in the input file. For example,
```
$zmat nonvdw(1)=1,4 $end
```
So, an input file for a geometry optimization of the water dimer would look like what I show below. That might seem a lot to type, but the trick is of course to type is once, store it somewhere handy, and copy it into new files.
```
$contrl runtyp=optimize dfttyp=b3lyp $end
$basis gbasis=n31 ngauss=6 ndfunc=1 $end
$scf dirscf =.t. $end
$statpt opttol=0.0005 nstep=50 $end
$contrl nzvar=1 $end
$zmat dlc=.t. auto=.t. nonvdw(1)=1,4 $end
$DATA
Title
C1
O 8.0 -4.42170 -0.11056 -2.11879
H 1.0 -3.53334 -0.03874 -1.70405
H 1.0 -4.75257 0.79398 -2.01675
O 8.0 -2.06207 0.35222 -0.78539
H 1.0 -1.13417 0.41136 -1.06880
H 1.0 -1.98676 0.07447 0.14406
$END
```

------

## 利用GAMESS-US进行LMOEDA能量分解
能量分解分析方法很多，最常用的有两类，一类是Morokuma的EDA能量分解；另一类是对称匹配微扰理论（SAPT），SAPT的简介可参考JMM,19,5387，综述见DOI:10.1002/wcms.86。此外还有NBO里的自然能量分解(NEDA)等方法。EDA形式的能量分解可用GAMESS-US、ADF或Q-Chem，SAPT可用PSI4、Molpro、Q-Chem。
利用Multiwfn的片段组合波函数功能，也能进行简单的能量分解，见手册3.100.8节的说明和手册4.100.8节的实例。DFT-D3程序参考《DFT-D色散校正的使用》（http://sobereva.com/210）。Multiwfn的能量分解无法拆开静电和交换互斥。 

**LMOEDZ in GAMESS**
>* 如果写cctyp=CCSD(T)则既有MP2色散能也有CCSD(T)色散能。MP2/CCSD(T)色散能是来自于它们计算的总相互作用能与HF总相互作用能的差值。如果用了DFT，则输出的色散能是复合物的相关能减去各个单体孤立状态下的相关能，这里说的相关能是交换相关泛函中的相关泛函对应的能量。
>* LMOEDA将总相互作用能分解为：静电能+交换能+互斥能+极化能+色散能。LMOEDA普适性比Morokuma广得多，可以用于多重态、可以分裂化学键、可以结合DFT以及R/U/RO。考虑相对论只能结合赝势而不能DK。
>* matom输入一串数，指定体系中哪些原子是那些片段，比如下例前三个原子是第一个片段，后4个是第二个片段。最多能指定十个。mcharge指定各个片段的电荷。mmult指定各个片段的自旋多重度，负值代表beta。
>* 默认是SUPBAS=.t.，即用counterpoise考虑BSSE，如果是.f.则输出只有"OWN BASIS SET"内容。
>* Morokuma形式的EDA只支持RHF闭壳层。在$morokm里定义内容。iatm和ICHM定义片段和每个片段的电荷。Morokuma可以将相互作用能分解为：静电+交换+极化+电荷转移+混合

LMOEDA能量分解例子，basnam混合基组+笛卡尔坐标
```
$contrl scftyp=rhf runtyp=eda cctyp=CCSD(T) ispher=1 $end
$system mwords=800 $end
$basis basnam(1)=H,Heavy,H,Heavy,H,H,H $end
$lmoeda matom(1)=3,4 mcharg(1)=0,0 mmult(1)=1,1 $end
$data
water-ammonia dimer
C1
H   1.0               0.00000000    0.00000000    0.00000000
O   8.0               0.00000000    0.00000000    0.95600000
H   1.0               0.92255577    0.00000000    1.20665285
N   7.0               2.82749833    0.00000000    1.72421429
H   1.0               2.94991596    0.00000000    2.72918578
H   1.0               3.31870502   -0.81208716    1.37181652
H   1.0               3.31870502    0.81208716    1.37181652
$end
$HCCD $end
$Heavy ACCD $end
```

------
**Gamess常见问题**

- CPU占用率低 
尝试进行直接SCF计算：DIRSCF=.TRUE.


------

# Gaussian
## Bond order in NBO analysis
You can calculate the bond order using NBO methodology within  Gaussian 09.. Below you can find a sample input and output extract:
For H2O, the input looks like this:
```
#N HF/3-21G SP POP=NBOREAD
H2O
 0 1
O
 H 1 B1
 H 1 B2 2 A1
A1 109.47122
B1 1.0500000
B2 1.0500000

$nbo bndidx $end
```
